add pool-to-pool ETL (#30)
brimdata/zync: README.md

It can run in either direction, syncing a Kafka topic to a Zed lake data pool
or vice versa.

`zync` can also apply transformations from one or more raw data pools
to a staging data pool in a transactionally consistent fashion based on
Debezium's read/create/update/delete model for CDC database logs.
In this way, you can use `zync` to sync input topics to raw data pools,
apply Debezium-aware transforms from the raw pools to a staging pool,

> and use `zync` to sync a staging pool to a target database, typically

Author: You will typically have many staging pools (e.g., one per table) so "a" staging pool makes more sense in this context.

> a data warehouse.

Author: As we discussed, input/output define dataflow behavior and Raw/Staging define ETL semantics and, in general, you will have many differently named raw and staging pools.   We can clarify this later when this all further along.

describing the topic, partition, and offset of the data received from Kafka.

If a Zed script is provided, it is applied to each such record before
syncing the data to the Zed pool.  While the script has access to the
metadata in the `kafka` field, it should not modify these values as this
field is relied upon by `zync`.

After optionally shaping each record with a Zed script, the data is committed
into the Zed data pool in a transactionally consistent fashion where any and
all data committed by zync writers must have monotonically increasing `kafka.offset`
relative to each topic indicated in `kafka.topic`.

As the kafka topic and offset is stored in each record,
the `zync from-kafka` command can query the maximum input offset in the pool
for each topic and resume syncing from where it last left off.

To avoid duplicate records,
it is best to configure `zync` with a single writer per Kafka topic.

> Note: we currently do not detect multiple writers to a pool but can do
> so with a small change to the load API to track commit IDs and detect
> write conflicts when the writer is not writing to the head commit that
> it expects.

> ### Syncing To Kafka

Author: According to the AP style guide: _According to the AP rules for composition titles, to is capitalized when it is part of an infinitive. This is explicitly mentioned in the AP Stylebook. The preposition to is still lowercased though._

"update event" on table B to perform a denormalized "update event" on table C
where the ETL needs info from both the A update and the B update to produce the
combined C update.
Or, in other cases,
it might be more straightforward to simply allow the individual updates to
be transformed to table C updates.   This would mean the ETL steps should be
specified in pieces so the `etl` command could apply a single configuration
to a combined A/B update vs a single A or a single B update.

The `zync etl` command assumes that each input record participates in exactly
one transformation event.  This way, `zync etl` can track which input records have
been processed and which remain to be processed by recording in the transformed
pool all the Kafka offsets by topic, exactly once, of each input event processed.

Also, for now, we will assume that prior to processing by the pipeline ETLs,
the `zync etl` command pre-maps each
Debezium event into the form:
```
{
  kafka: {topic:string,partition:int64,offset:int64},
  op: string,
  key: null
  value: {...}
}
```
where `op` is the Debezium event type, i.e., one of "r", "c", "u", or "d"

> encoded in the value portion of the Kafka message and value is the `after`

Author: I guess so but it was trying to describe where the op field comes from.  Not important to the doc.

> encoded in the value portion of the Kafka message and value is the `after`

Author: The subsequent Zed clarifies the point anyway.

the command is configured with YAML.

> These yaml options are preliminary and will be iterated upon and change.

Configuration is currently all in a single YAML file.

```
# Routes define a pool for each Kafka topic, whether it's an input or an output.
# The namespace of topics is currently shared between inputs and outputs as we
# presume a single Kafka cluster for both the inputs and outputs (though this is
# not a strict requirement).
inputs:
  - topic: TableA
    pool: Raw
  - topic: TableB
    pool: Raw

outputs:    
  - topic: TableC
    pool: Staging

# ETLs define transformation rules from one or more input table(s) to
# to an output table, using the routes to determine the pools where each
# topic is stored.
ETLs:
  - type: denorm // denorm or stateless
    where: |
      optional zed boolean to select this rule
    left: TableA
    right: TableB
    join-on: TableA.ID=TableB.InvoiceID
    out: TableC
    zed: |
      zed script that is applied to all records before storing them in the pool
      and creates the top-level field this.TableC
  - type: stateless
    where: value.op=="u"
    in: TableA
    out: TableC
    zed: |

>       zed script that is applied to all records before storing them in the pool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Zed script that is applied to all records before storing them in the pool
```

      and creates the top-level field this.TableC
```

> Note that this YAML design is only configuring a single ETL pipeline between
> Zed data pools without any Kafka integration.  We need to work out another layer of
> YAML config that can embed these ETL configurations and will additional logic
> to wire up the `from-kafka` and `to-kafka` processes and run many instances
> over a cluster.  The current plan is to have a `zync build` command that will take
> the `zync` YAMLs and produce `helm` charts to deploy all the needed `zync` processes
> across a kubernetes cluster.

### The ETL Algorithm

The algorithm here described how the ETLs are stitched together to perform the
desired transformations.  Note that the YAML config above needs know nothing
about the details below.  However, it's useful to know how things work so you
can debug problems that arise (and perhaps performance issues).

> > TBD: We'll create a set of pre-canned Brim queries that can be used to easily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> TBD: We'll create a set of canned Brim queries that can be used to easily
```

> navigate to different views of what's going on in a live ETL process.

When the `zync etl` command is run, it queries the current state of its
input and output pools, determines if any of the ETLs have work to do,
runs the ETLs to get the transformed results, creates completion records
for all records processed (by each input topic),
and records the transformed records and completions records in an atomic
commit in the output pool.  It then exits.

To make incremental updates efficient, the pools must be sorted by `kafka.offset`
(in ascending order) and

> for each topic, we maintain a cursor per input topic, call this `$cursor[$topic]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for each topic, we maintain a cursor per input topic, referred to below as `$cursor[$topic]`.
```

A completion record is recorded in the output pool for each input record that has
been processed, which has the form
```
{kafka:{topic:string,offset:int64}}(=done)
```
> Note there is no Kafka partition as we require in-order delivery and thus
> only one partition per topic.

At startup, to compute the cursors we simply run a query for each input topic
on the output lake
```
is(type(done)) | max(kafka.offset) by kafka.topic
```
> We can make this efficient by using `head 1` inside of switch legs where each
> switch case is one of the topics and scanning in descending order, which is the
> reverse order of the pool.  TBD: we have an issue to make reverse range scanning
> efficient; right now, we read the whole range and do a sort -r.  This is not
> a trivial task but isn't too hard.

We can then enumerate the unprocessed records, by scanning the raw pool

> from the smallest cursor up and doing an anti-join for each topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the smallest cursor up and doing an anti join for each topic.
```

The following (pseudo)Zed would be stitched together from the YAML config by `zync`

> (assuming two input topics "TableA" and "TableB")...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(assuming two input topics "TableA" and "TableB").
```

```
split (
    => from (

>         raw range from $cursor["TableA"] to MAXINT64 => kafka.topic=="TableA";
>         staging range from $cursor["TableA"] to MAXINT64 => is(type(done)) && kafka.topic=="TableA";
>       ) | anti join on kafka.offset=kafka.offset ;
>     => from (
>         raw range from $cursor["TableB"] to MAXINT64 => kafka.topic=="TableB";
>         staging range from $cursor["TableB"] to MAXINT64 => is(type(done)) && kafka.topic=="TableB";

Reviewer: Make these pools match those in the YAML up above and demo down below?
```suggestion
        Raw range from $cursor["TableA"] to MAXINT64 => kafka.topic=="TableA";
        Staging range from $cursor["TableA"] to MAXINT64 => is(type(done)) && kafka.topic=="TableA";
      ) | anti join on kafka.offset=kafka.offset ;
    => from (
        Raw range from $cursor["TableB"] to MAXINT64 => kafka.topic=="TableB";
        Staging range from $cursor["TableB"] to MAXINT64 => is(type(done)) && kafka.topic=="TableB";
```

      ) | anti join on kafka.offset=kafka.offset ;
  )
  | switch (
    <where-denorm> =>
      split (
        => kafka.topic==<left> | this[<left>]:=value.after | sort <right-key> ;
        => kafka.topic==<right> | this[<right>]:=value.after | sort <left-key> ;
      )
      | join on <join-on>
      | <zed>
      | value.after:=this[<out>]
      | kafka.topic:=<out> // zync will fix kafka.offset
      ;
    <where-stateless> && kafka.topic==<in> =>
      | <zed>
      | value.after:=this[<out>]
      | kafka.topic:=<out> // zync will fix kafka.offset
      ;
    ...
  )
```

### Demo

> Start a zed lake service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start a Zed lake service.
```

```
mkdir scratch
zed lake service -R scratch
```

> Create pools for Raw and Staging:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create `Raw` and `Staging` pools:
```

```
zapi create -orderby kafka.offset Raw
zapi create -orderby kafka.offset Staging
```
Load the first batch of test data into `Raw`, as if `zync from-kafka` imported
it from its topics to `Raw` as Debezium CDC logs:
```
zapi load -use Raw@main demo/batch-1.zson
```
You can easily see the Debezium table updates loaded into `Raw` with `zapi query`:
```
zapi query -f table "from Raw | kafka.topic=='Invoices' | this:=value.after"
zapi query -f table "from Raw | kafka.topic=='InvoiceStatus' | this:=value.after"
```
These are all type "r" (read) Debezium logs and represent two new rows in each
of the `Invoice` and `InvoiceStatus` tables.  Transform them to `Staging` with
```
zync etl demo/invoices.yaml
```

> This will report the commit and number of input records processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will report the commit ID and number of input records processed.
```

Note that the number of records committed into

> the pool is different than the number of records that was ETLd as the destination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the pool is different than the number of records produced by ETL as the destination
```

> pool includes meta-data records tracking which input events have been processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pool includes metadata records tracking which input events have been processed.
```

After running the ETL, you can see the denormalized CDC updates in the
`Staging` pool:
```
zapi query -f table "from Staging | kafka.topic=='NewInvoices' | this:=value.after"
```
You can also see the progress updates marking the input records completed
that are stored alongside the data in `Staging`:
```
zapi query "from Staging | is(type(done))"
```

If you run the ETL again with no new data, it will do nothing as you do not
want duplicate data in the output:
```
zync etl demo/invoices.yaml
```

> > `zync` uses an anti-join between the completion records in the output pool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `zync` uses an anti join between the completion records in the output pool
```

the `Raw` pool:
```
zapi load -use Raw@main demo/batch-2.zson
```
In this file, there are new `Invoices` rows for Charlie and Dan but only an
`InvoiceStatus` row for Charlie.  This means only the Charlie data can be
denormalized and the Dan `Invoices` row will be left unprocessed awaiting
the arrival of its `InvoiceStatus` counterpart.
```
zync etl demo/invoices.yaml
```
You can see that the Charlie row made it Staging:
```
zapi query -f table "from Staging | kafka.topic=='NewInvoices' | this:=value.after"
```
but the Dan row is still pending.  You can see the pending records for this
example by running
```
zapi query -Z -I demo/pending.zed
```
Now let's load another batch of records that provides the InvoiceStatus create
event for the Dan row and a "stateless" `InvoiceStatus` update to change
Alice's status to "paid":
```
zapi load -use Raw@main demo/batch-3.zson
zync etl demo/invoices.yaml
```
Now we can see the Dan row made it to `Staging`:
```
zapi query -f table "from Staging | not is(type(done)) | this:={seqno:kafka.offset,op:value.op,row:value.after} | fuse"
```

> NOTE: we formatted this output a bit differently as the updates are getting

> > more complex.  Here we numbered each update CDC order, included the Debezium

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> more complex.  Here we numbered each update according to CDC order, included the Debezium
```

> `op` field, and fused the tables so you can see where the updates fall in

> > the table...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> the table.
```

Finally, in the last batch, the remaining invoices marked "pending" are
all updated...

```
zapi load -use Raw@main demo/batch-4.zson
zync etl demo/invoices.yaml
```

And re-run the table query from above to see the final result:
```
zapi query -f table "from Staging | not is(type(done)) | this:={seqno:kafka.offset,op:value.op,row:value.after} | fuse"
```

#### `anti join`

> If you're curious how anti-join works, try this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're curious how anti join works, try this:
```
